# Narrative and Text Generation AI
## Top-Level
This activity is designed to take one in-class session, with students having interacted with the assigned narrative/technology prior to class.
For more information, see the `Structure and Context` subsection in [introduction.md](introduction.md#structure-and-context).

Please note that this guide is just that: a guide. You are welcome to change it as you see fit for your classroom, and I would in fact love to hear about anyone doing so and how they went about the activity.

## Materials and Software Required
Students will need a device that can access the internet, an account with [AI Dungeon](https://beta.aidungeon.com/), and access to the site.

## Prior to Class
### Assigned Work
#### Estimate: 1 hour
Students should create an account with AI Dungeon and "play" it for roughly one hour prior to class. This involves selecting a genre and character role, then exchanging messages back and forth with the [ChatGPT](https://chat.openai.com)-backed storytelling engine, much like one would interact with ChatGPT directly.

## In Class
### AI Dungeon Generalities
#### Estimate: 20 minutes
Below are the questions I use to guide the initial student conversation about their interactions with AI Dungeon. I do not follow this structure strictly. Some questions might be addressed out of order based on student responses, or some might be omitted or added as appropriate. I do, however, recommend giving students plenty of time to describe their stories. Alternatively, you might break students into groups based on their chosen genres to guide conversations about how AI Dungeon represents genres, and identify similarities and differences between players' experiences.

I encourage instructors to adapt the questions to their own style of guiding in-class conversation.

* What genre did you choose? How did AI Dungeon represent that genre?
* How well did ChatGPT do at interpreting your input?
* How effective was AI Dungeon of keeping track of the events and entities in your story?
* What was *your* story? What happened, and did it feel truly interactive?
* By the time you finished playing, how cohesive did your "story" feel?
* Were there any places where the cohesion of the narrative broke down? What happened?

### GPT Explainer
#### Estimate: 10 minutes
This section of class is a short lecture, paired with some prompting questions for students about their knowledge of or experience with generative text AI. There are many approaches to explaining how ChatGPT works, and many explainers of the technology that you might reference (e.g. Stephen Wolfram's [What Is ChatGPT Doing ... and Why Does It Work?](https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt-doing-and-why-does-it-work/_)). I have included below my approach to explaining the subject, which involves breaking down the G, P, and T parts of ChatGPT, after an initial question to prompt students to explain the technology in their own terms.

* What is your understanding of how ChatGPT works?
* Does anyone know what GPT stands for?

I choose to write each of the three terms on a whiteboard or chalkboard, so that students can follow each separate explanation. The descriptions below are purposefully simple, so that students may interject with questions at each stage.

##### Generative
*Generative* refers to the fact that GPT-based technnology generates an output in response to user input, in this case text. Students might be familiar with other kinds of generative AI, such as Craiyon's Dall-E Mini [https://www.craiyon.com/] or [Midjourney](https://www.midjourney.com/). In any case, the point is that something is generated.

##### Pre-Trained
GPT-based technologies are *pre-trained*, i.e. they are trained on a dataset prior to their deployment and use. In the case of ChatGPT, it is trained on billions of web pages, including digitally available books, [Wikipedia](wikipedia.org)], and pages linked to from [Reddit](reddit.com). The output, then, is based on probabilities of what words tend to follow the prior words in this dataset, meaning biases in the dataset can be replicated in output.

##### Transformer
It is worth noting that techhnologies such as ChatGPT do not only look at the previous word when determining the next word. This is due to the use of *transformer* architecture. This architecture enables the GPT model to retain the context and importance of certain words or phrases, weighting some words or phrases more than others and thus maintaining their relevance throughout the output. This explains how your story was able to keep track of, say, characters, character roles, and places.

##### General Reflection
It is worth emphasizing that while GPT-based technology uses the transformer architecture to retain context and importance of certain words and phrases, it is still fundamentally a stochastic model. That is, the next word generated by the technology is still based on the probability of what words would likely follow, with those probabilities coming from relations and connections identified in the pre-training phase.

### AI Dungeon, GPTs, and Narrative
#### Estimate: 20 minutes
Below are the questions I use to guide the remaining conversation about the nature of narrative, technology, and generative text AI.

* Does anyone have any questions about how ChatGPT works in terms of the brief overview given here?
* How does interacting with ChatGPT via AI Dungeon compare to other forms of interaction in video games?
* How does interacting with ChatGPT via AI Dungeon compare to other video games where you make decisions about what your character does or says?
* For anyone who has experience playing tabletop roleplaying games—such as *Dungeons and Dragons* where a "game master" or "dungeon master" mediates between the narrative and player decisions—how does AI Dungeon compare to that experience?
* Does a narrative have to be pre-determined? Can a set of characters, places, and events randomly strung together be a narrative?
* If AI Dungeon has no sense of the meaning of what is happening, i.e. no understanding of the "story" being told, then is the result of interacting with ChatGPT still a narrative?
* Is the dynamism of AI Dungeon exciting because it, in a sense, can produce infinite story variations?
* Is there something lost when we remove the human element from the role of storyteller, or is this an exciting new possibility?